Real control-dependent inference: frozen scGen

From the source checkout after installing the package:

  python examples/conditioned_model_reference/run.py --input examples/real_model_reference/data/input.json --output outputs/conditioned_model_reference

NumPy and SciPy suffice. The example includes a 10.3 MB numeric export of an
existing trained scGen fit. It reuses the real count matrix, gene annotations
and cell roles in real_model_reference; no download or training is needed.
The wheel supplies the predictor code. Example weights and cells are source
archive assets, so retain both sibling example directories when relocating them.

Prediction

This model encodes each normalized control cell, adds a fixed training-derived
latent shift, and decodes a predicted treated state. The two hidden layers in
each network use their learned weights, stored batch-normalization statistics
and LeakyReLU activation. Inference uses the posterior mean, with dropout off.
It does not add a fixed effect directly to the input expression.

The original seed17/epoch160 checkpoint is unchanged. The NPZ export omits the
optimizer, random-generator state and unused posterior-variance head. PARITY.json
records comparisons against the original Torch prediction path on multiple
conditions, batch sizes, repeated cells and all four allocations. Small float32
roundoff differences are expected across numerical libraries. PROVENANCE.json
binds the original fit, source code, every exported parameter and training setup.

The 24 controls and 8 treated cells are the same previously used Parse training
cells supplied with the PCA example. Seed17 is the first original fit seed;
neither the seed nor cells were chosen for this example's scoring outcomes.
This demonstrates software use and model-input dependence, not generalization,
biological replication or a model-ranking advantage.

Operations

All four fixed-seed permutations of the 24 controls are retained. Each forms
three disjoint eight-cell blocks A, B and C. The model is called separately on
each block. The treated mean and training-derived gene scales remain fixed.

operation              model input    prediction centre    observed reference
anchor_O                    A                 A                    C
input_only                  B                 A                    C
rescore_only                A                 A                    B
matched_O_new_input         B                 B                    C
shared_S                    A                 A                    A

shared_S uses eight shared cells; anchor_O uses eight input and eight observed
cells. The full 24-cell pool supports these role diagnostics. These two rows
are not a comparison at equal physical control budget; the separate fixed_budget
API provides that design.

input_only isolates model-input changes: both scoring references stay fixed.
It is a diagnostic operation, not the matched O protocol. rescore_only reuses
the identical native state and changes only the observed reference. The matched
O operation changes input and prediction centre together. These rows distinguish
new model predictions from changes caused by centring or evaluation references.

For each matched baseline, the native state Q and its effect encoding Q-C_input
must receive the same O score. The effect encoding is the same prediction, not
a second learned model. role_scores.tsv retains all 27 assignments and marks
the subset where this encoding contract applies; equality is not claimed for
assignments that change the prediction centre away from the model-input block.
The effect-encoding score is left blank for those unmatched assignments.

Output and accounting

operation_scores.tsv reports each operation's score, prediction hash and scaled
RMS displacement from the anchor. control_membership.tsv records every control
block. inference_arrays.npz includes all per-cell predictions, block means,
normalized inputs, treatment mean, scales and allocation indices for direct
recalculation. RESULTS.json records input/weight hashes and array axes.

The four allocations make 12 actual inference calls over 96 control cells.
One additional call over the complete 24-cell pool checks the caching contract.
Rescoring adds no inference. With evaluation-mode batch normalization, this
particular model has a fixed per-cell prediction and its point bank can be
reused within measured numerical tolerance. That property must be checked anew
for a model whose prediction depends on other cells in the input set.

Your own cells

--input accepts the JSON/TSV/sparse-NPZ schema described in
../real_model_reference/USAGE.txt, with exactly 24 controls and 8 treated cells.
The full 40,352-gene source axis is required; explicitly reordered columns are
mapped by gene identity. Library totals use every source gene before CP10K,
log1p and projection to the fitted 2,000-gene panel. No genes are imputed and
no normalization parameter, shift or scale is fitted on the supplied cells.
Unsupported context/condition pairs and incorrect feature axes are rejected.
The unit label records the caller's experimental definition; it cannot establish
independence. Use a new or empty output directory.

Rights

Predictor and example code follow the repository BSD-3-Clause license. Data and
trained weights retain the Parse noncommercial scope in LICENSE_SCOPE.md. The
export is for the fixed mean-inference path and is not a scGen training package.
Original implementation: scGen and scvi-tools; exact source hashes and versions
are recorded in PROVENANCE.json. Dataset and terms:
https://www.parsebiosciences.com/datasets/10-million-human-pbmcs-in-a-single-experiment/
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/
