Frozen Parse PCA: real inference and reference scoring

From the source checkout, after installing the package:

  python examples/real_model_reference/run.py --input examples/real_model_reference/data/input.json --output outputs/real_model_reference

This runs on CPU with NumPy and SciPy. The checkout includes the original
2.09 MB fitted checkpoint and 32 real cells; no download or training is needed.
The Python inference module is installed in the wheel. The example script and
data are source/release assets and are not included in the wheel.

What runs

The frozen PCA/ridge model was fitted on Parse PBMC training effects. The
example uses 24 control and 8 IFN-gamma-treated CD4 Naive cells from one of the
original training donors. These cells have already been used in training:
this is a usage demonstration, not independent validation of model quality.
PROVENANCE.json records the source, training contract and original hashes.

Every allocation calls the fitted predictor again. It consumes the trained
cell-type and condition labels at unit dose; its native output is a direct
effect and does not depend on control-cell expression or membership. The
example therefore illustrates a real direct-effect interface, not a trained
control-conditioned state model. NC is the zero-effect baseline.

Each of four fixed-seed allocations draws 16 of the 24 controls. S uses all
16 as both input and observation reference. O uses 8 as input and the other
8 as observation reference. The same 8 treated cells are used throughout.
For either protocol, the target is mean(treated) minus mean(observed controls).
Loss is the mean squared error after division by fixed training gene scales.
Reference changes can change the loss even though this model's effect is fixed.

The example also represents the identical effect d as control + d and checks
that centring once on the input controls gives the same loss, within floating
point tolerance. This conversion is not another trained predictor. It must
not be used as evidence that general state-output models ignore their input
cells. Such models must be called separately for each new input allocation
unless their per-cell caching contract has been established.

Output

RESULTS.json binds inputs and weights, lists all scores, prediction-call count,
control-cell forwards (zero for this direct model), and wall time.
scores.tsv has PCA native-effect, equivalent-state and NC losses.
cell_membership.tsv records every input, observation and treated role.
inferred_effects.npy contains newly computed effects, not cached inputs.
An existing nonempty output directory is rejected.

Your own cells

Use --input path/to/input.json with the same schema as data/input.json:
counts is a SciPy sparse NPZ with cells as rows and raw counts as columns;
features is a TSV with source_index (0-based input column order) and feature_id;
cells is a TSV with cell_id and role (control or treated), in count-row order.
Require at least 16 controls and exactly 8 treated cells from the one declared
unit, context and condition. The caller is responsible for these biological
labels. A unit label is recorded, not used to infer biological independence.

All 40,352 training source genes must be present; an explicit column
permutation is accepted. The library sum uses all genes before CP10K/log1p
normalization and projection to the fixed 2,000 genes. No missing genes are
filled, no scale is re-estimated, and held-out treated cells are not used to
fit a transform. Sparse zero entries are genuine measured zeros, not a way
to encode missing genes. Unsupported contexts and conditions are rejected.
The default task is CD4 Naive / IFN-gamma; the checkpoint's trained label
lists are accessible through FrozenPCA.context_ids and compound_dose_ids.
This example does not provide cross-platform gene mapping or claim that
matching gene labels alone establishes cross-platform comparability.

Rights

Code uses the repository BSD-3-Clause license. Counts, gene annotations,
training-derived scales and model weights retain the Parse CC BY-NC 4.0
noncommercial scope. See LICENSE.txt and the repository LICENSE_SCOPE.md.

The dataset is Parse Biosciences' 10 million human PBMC cytokine dataset:
https://www.parsebiosciences.com/datasets/10-million-human-pbmcs-in-a-single-experiment/

Source attribution and noncommercial terms must accompany redistribution.
